At the winter solstice,
the longest night of the year,
we take time to consider
the virtue of darkness:
the strength
and honesty
to face what is dark,
and hard,
and true.
The virtue of darkness
is the willingness to stare
into challenges
so immense they seem unsolvable,
and not look away.
Solstice also cultivates the
virtue of fire:
the virtue of ambition, and
problem-solving,
and a visceral desire to do
something, to fight back
against the dark and the cold.
It is gathering together to
tell stories of the beautiful
futures we see flickering in
the flames.
It is electricity,
and rockets,
and the dream of a different
existence.
And then,
there is the virtue of ash:
the virtue of resilience,
of carrying on.
It is the virtue of looking at
the burnt ruins of a house
you spent years building,
of feeling sick
with the weight of what was
lost,
and beginning to rebuild,
because
what else is there to do but
rebuild?
Where else is there to go
but back up the mountain,
pushing yourself
and your dreams higher once
again.
The virtue of ash
means somehow making the
possibilities of the future
feel more salient than the
aching absence of what was lost.
It means seeing today
as the starting point for
tomorrow,
even when the scale of broken
things we must rebuild
seems unfathomable.
It means
beginning to lay a new
foundation,
even when you know you may
never live to see the house
built on it
shining
with warmth and wholeness again,
the way it was
on that last night in your
memory.